>> Ifill: DEFENSE SECRETARY
CHUCK HAGEL CALLED ON NORTH
KOREA TO COOL ITS RHETORIC,
AFTER IT BARRED HUNDREDS OF
SOUTH KOREAN WORKERS FROM A
FACTORY COMPLEX ON THE BORDER.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, WE
EXAMINE THE STRATEGIC AND
ECONOMIC SIGNIFICANCE OF THE
SHUTDOWN AND THE HEIGHTENED
TENSIONS.
>> Ifill: THEN, WE GET TWO VIEWS
ABOUT THE SAFETY OF OIL
PIPELINES, AFTER A RUPTURE IN
ARKANSAS LAST WEEK FORCED THE
EVACUATION OF MORE THAN 20
HOMES.
>> Woodruff: JEFFREY BROWN
EXAMINES THE IMPACT OF ACROSS-
THE-BOARD FEDERAL SPENDING CUTS
ON SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH.
>> Ifil JOHl:N MERROW REPORTS ON
A KENTUCKY SCHOOL DISTRICT
THAT'S SPENDING LESS TIME
TESTING STUDENTS AND MORE TIME
ON PROJECTS LIKE BUILDING
ROCKETS.
>> ARE THEY LEARNING?
YES.
I FEEL LIKE THEY'RE PROBABLY
LEARNING MORE THAN THEY EVER
WOULD JUST SITTING THERE HEARING
ME TELL THEM ABOUT A CERTAIN
SECTION OF TEXTBOOK.
>> Woodruff: WE GET THE LATEST
ON AN ARIZONA MAN FREED FROM
PRISON AFTER 42 YEARS, WHEN NEW
EVIDENCE SURFACED ABOUHIST
MURDER CONVICTION.
>> Ifill: AND WE CLOSE WITH THE
STORY OF A THEATER GROUP THAT
BRINGS SHAKPEARESE'S CLASSICS
INTO SCHOOLS, AS A WAY TO REDUCE
TEASING AND TEEN VIOLENCE.
>> THERE'S CHARACTERS IN THE
PLAYS THAT ARE MORE THE BULLYING
TYPE.
THERE'S SOME THAT ARE MORE THE
VICTIMS.
IT REALLY LENDS ITSELF TO A
CONVERSATION ABOUT ALL THOSE
ROLES.
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Ifill: THE MOUNTING HOSTILITY
ON THE KOREAN PENINSULA TOOK AN
ECONOMIC TURN TODAY AT A CLUSTER
OF FACTORIES JOINTLY OWNED BY
THE TWO COUNTRIES.
TRUCKS FILLED WITH SUPPLIES AND
SOUTH KOREAN WORKERS WAITED IN
LONG LINES AT THE BORDER WITH
THE NORTH TODAY BEFORE BEING
TURNED AWAY.
AND SOME ALREADY ON THE OTHER
SIDE COULDN'T GO HOME.
>> (translated): OTHER PEOPLE
COULDN'T RETURN BECAUSE THEY
WERE SUPPOSED TO LEAVE BY
TRUCKS, WHICH WERE SCHEDULED TO
ENTER THE NORTH CARRYING
SUPPLIES.
HOWEVER THOSE TRUCKS COULDN'T
GET IN NORTH KOREA.
>> Ifill: THE KAESONG INDUSTRIAL
ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE
TWO COUNTRIES.
IT HOUSES FACTORIES OVER 120
SOUTH KOREAN COMPANIES, EMPLOYS
MORE THAN 50,000 NORTH KOREANS.
AND HUNDREDS MORE SOUTH KOREANS
WHO COMMUTE ACROSS THE HEAVILY
FORTIFIED BORDER EACH WEEK.
SOUTH KOREAN MANAGERS AND
WORKERS FEARED THE TRAVEL BAN
WOULD COST JOBS AND HURT
BUSINESS FAR BEYOND KAESONG.
>> (translated): IT'S VERY
SERIOUS.
GIVEN THE CURRENT SITUATION,
FACTORY OPERATIONS COULD HAVE
PROBLEMS TWO TO THREE DAYS TERLA
AND IT WILL DAMAGE DELIVERIES.
>> (translated): IT WILL CAUSE
>> Ifill: SOUTH KOREA'S
UNIFICATION MINISTER URGED KIM
JONG UN'S GOVERNMENT TO REVERSE
ITS DECISION.
>> (translated): NORTH KOREA'S
MEASURE TO SUSPEND THE
INDUSTRIAL ZONE IS AN OBSTACLE
TO THE STABLE MANAGEMENT OF THE
ZONE.
WE URGE THE NORTH TO IMMEDIATELY
NORMALIZE THE ACCESS TO THE
KAESONG INDUSTRIAL ZONE.
>> Ifill: TODAY'S BORDER ACTION
IS the LATEST RESPONSE TO SOUTH
KOREA'S ONGOING JOINT MILITARY
EXERCISES WITH THE U.S.
IT COMES A DAY AFTER NORTH KOREA
ANNOUNCED IT WOULD RESTART
PRODUCTION OF NUCLEAR WEAPON
MATERIALS.
AND TODAY NORTH KOREAN STATE
TELEVISION BROADCAST AN UNDATED
VIDEO OF WHAT IT SAID WAS AN
ANTI-AMERICAN RALLY WITH
THOUSANDS OF STUDENTS CHANTING
"LET'S KILL."
SOUTH KOREA'S DEFENSE MINISTER
ADVISED THE NORTH TO TAMP DOWN
ITS RHETORIC.
>> (translated): I AM WARNING
NORTH KOREA TO STOP ITS THREATS.
I WANT TO ANNOUNCE HERE THAT WE
HAVE A FULL MILITARY READINESS
POSTURE.
IT IS IMPORTANT FOR THE SOUTH
KOREAN PEOPLE NOT TO BE AGITATED
BY NORTH KOREA'S THREATS,
BECAUSE WE HAVE A FIRM MILITARY
POSTURE.
>> Ifill: AND, SPEAKING IN
WASHINGTON TODAY, DEFENSE
SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL SAID THE
U.S. MUST REMAIN VIGILANT.
>> I DON'T WANT TO BE THE
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE WHO WAS
WRONG ONCE.
SO WE WILL CONTINUE TO TAKE
THESE THREATS SERIOUSLY.
I HOPE THE NORTH WILL RACHET
THIS VERY DANGEROUS RHETORIC
DOWN.
THERE IS A PATHWAY THAT IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE NORTH TO GET
ON A PATH TO PEACE, BUT THEY'VE
GOT TO BE A RESPONSIBLE MEMBER
OF THE WORLD COMMUNITY.
>> Ifill: DEFENSE DEPARTMENT
OFFICIALS ANNOUNCED THIS
AFTERNOON THE U.S. IS SENDING A
LAND-BASED MISLE DSIEFENSE
SYSTEM TO GUAM IN RESPONSE TO
RISING NORTH KOREAN THREATS.
IN THE PAST TWO DAYS, THE
PENTAGON HAS ALSO SENT GUIDED
MISSILE DESTROYERS TO THE
WESTERN PACIFIC.
>> Ifill: FOR MORE ON THE
ESCALATING BORDER TENSIONS, WE
TURN TO FORMER AMBASSADOR JACK
PRITCHARD, WHO HAS BEEN INVOLVED
WITH KOREAN PEACE NEGOTIATIONS
FOR BOTH PRESIDENTS GEORGE W.
BUSH AND BILL CLINTON.
WELCOME.
>> THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: IS THE PRESSURE
SHIFTING FROM MILITARY TO
ECONOMIC NOW?
>> NOT AS MUCH.
BUT THIS IS AN UNSETTLING
DEVELOPMENT WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT
HOW IMPORTANT THE KAESONG
INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX IS TO THE
NORTH KOREANS.
IT'S A SOURCE OF HARD CURRENCY
FOR THEM AND SO SHOOTING
THEMSELVES IN THE FOOT FOR A
LONGER PERIOD OF TIME MEANS
THEY'RE GOING TO BE MISSING OUT
ON THE KIND OF GOLDEN GOOSE
HERE.
>> Ifill: WE SAW SOUTH KOREAN
BUSINESS PEOPLE SAYING IT COULD
BE A BAD EFFECT FOR THEM AS WELL
BECAUSE OF THE SUPPLY CHAIN THAT
FEEDS KAESONG.
>> TO PUT IN THE CONTEXT,
KAESONG INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX
PRODUCES ABOUT $500 MILLION OF
MERCHANDISE EACH YEAR: WATCHES,
SHOES, CLOTHES, THINGS OF THAT
NATURE.
IT'S A DROP IN THE BUCKET WHEN
YOU TAKE A LOOK AT THE OVERALL
SOUTH KOREAN ECONOMY, BUT FOR
THOSE 123 COMPANIES AND THE
SUPPLY CHAINS THAT ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH IT, IT IS A BIG
DEAL FOR THEM.
>> Ifill: AND SYMBOLICALLY,
THIS WAS THE FRUIT OF THE
SUNSHINE POLICY THIS IDEA WHICH
THE NORTH AND SOUTH-- THE
PREVIOUS PRESIDENTS OF THE NORTH
AND SOUTH-- COULD AGREE ON
SOMETHING.
IS THAT DEAD NOW?
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S DEAD BUT
WE'VE GOT TO WATCH IT VERY
CLOSELY.
AS YOU RIGHTLY SAY, THIS WAS THE
PRODUCT OF THE SUMMIT, THE FIRST
SUMMIT BETWEEN NORTH AND SOUTH
IN 2000, KIM DAY JONG AND KIM
JONG-IL AND OPENED IN 2004 AND
HAS BEEN OPERATING FOR ABOUT
NINE YEARS NOW.
>> Ifill: IS THIS PROVOCATION
OR POT STIRRING OR BOTH?
>> WELL, THERE'S THE INTERESTING
QUESTION.
IF IT WERE NOT FOR A PRECEDENT
THAT WAS SET IN 2010 WITH THE
SINKING OF THE CHO UNANIMOUS, A
SOUTH KOREAN SHIP BY THE NORTH
KOREANS AND THE ARTILLERY FIRING
ON THE ISLAND LATER IN THAT YEAR
YOU WOULD SAY CONVENTIONAL
WISDOM SAYS THIS WILL PASS.
THERE WILL BE A RETURN TO
NORMALCY.
BUT THAT PRECEDENT SUGGESTS THAT
YOU MUST WATCH WHAT'S GOING ON.
WILL IT TURN WORSE?
>> Ifill: NOW, THIS PARK, THIS
PARTICULAR COMPLEX, HAS BEEN
KIND OF A PAWN IN THE
GEOPOLITICAL CHESS GAME BEFORE.
IT DIDN'T HAVE ANY LASTING
EFFECT-- OR DID IT?
>> NO, IT DIDN'T.
ABOUT FOUR YEARS THE NORTH
KOREANS DID WHAT THEY'RE DOING
NOW AND THEY RESTRICTED ACCESS
TO SOUTH KOREAN WORKERS.
STRANGELY ENOUGH, IN 2010 WITH
THE SINKING OF THE SHIP AND THE
ARTILLERY FIRING NOTHING
HAPPENED AT THE KAESONG
INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX.
SO NOW WE'RE BACK TO SAYING, YOU
KNOW, WHAT'S GOING ON, HOW LONG
WILL THAT LAST, WHAT'S THE
IMPACT AND THE POLITICAL
SIGNIFICANCE.
>> Ifill: SHOULD ANYBODY
WATCHING THIS BE WORRIED THAT
SOUTH KOREAN WORKERS WHO AREN'T
BEING ALLOWED TO GO ACROSS THE
BOARDER TO GO HOME BE TREATED AS
HOSTAGES?
>> THAT WAS A CONCERN FOUR YEARS
AGO BUT SO FAR WHAT WE'RE SEEING
TODAY IS THE NORTH KOREANS
RESTRICTING ACCESS IN BUT
ALLOWING SOUTH KOREANS OUT.
SO RIGHT NOW THERE'S NOT A HINT
OF THE HOSTAGE SITUATION BUT
SOMETHING THE SOUTH KOREANS
WATCH CAREFULLY.
>> Ifill: IN INTRAPOLITICS
THIS IS A WAY OF TESTING THE NEW
LEADER?
>> WELL, THE SOUTH KOREANS HAVE
A NEW PRESIDENT, SHE'S BEEN IN
OFFICE ABOUT FIVE WEEKS SO FAR
SO THERE'S A LITTLE TESTING, BUT
IT'S UNINITIAL THE SENSE THAT
THE NORTH KOREANS HATED THE
PREVIOUS PRESIDENT, HARD LINE,
AND SAW IN THE ELECTION OF MADAM
PARK THE POTENTIAL OF A PARTNER.
BUT THEY'RE NOT OPERATING AS
THOUGH THAT'S THEIR INTENT.
>> Ifill: JAY CARNEY, THE
PRESIDENT'S PERES SECRETARY, WAS
ASKED ABOUT THIS ON AIR FORCE
ONE AND HE SAID THIS IS PART OF
A IF MILL WAR PATTERN.
YOU'VE BEEN FOLLOWING DOES IT F?
>> AS I SAY, THE ONLY DIFFERENCE
IS THAT PRECEDENT OF ALMOST
THREE YEARS AGO.
WERE IT NOT FOR THAT, IT WOULD
BE A VERY FAMILIAR PATTERN.
BUT YOU CAN NOT ASSUME THAT IT
WILL FOLLOW PREVIOUS EVENTS AND
END UP WITH A REDUCTION OF
TENSIONS AND A RETURN TO
NORMALCY.
>> Ifill: IT DOES NOT FEEL
MORE DANGEROUS TO YOU?
>> SLIGHTLY MORE DANGEROUS
BECAUSE YOU HAVE A COMPOUNDING
OF EVENTS THAT HAVE TAKEN PLACE
SINCE DECEMBER WITH THE LAUNCH
OF A SUCCESSFUL MISSILE BY NORTH
KOREA.
THEIR NUCLEAR TEST IN FEBRUARY,
THE U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL'S
SANCTIONS, IT'S COME AT A TIME
WHERE U.S. AND SOUTH KOREAN
ANNUAL EXERCISES ARE TAKING
PLACE.
SO THERE ARE A LOT OF THINGS
THAT ARE MAKING THIS SLIGHTLY
DIFFERENT AND POTENTIALLY MORE
DANGEROUS THAN WE'VE MEAN?
THE PAST.
>> Ifill: AT THE VERY LEAST,
IT SEEMS LIKE THE RHETORIC IS
MORE HEATED.
IS CHINA THE SOLUTION?
IS THERE A BACK CHANNEL WAY TO
CALM THIS DOWN?
>> WE CERTAINLY HOPE SO.
WE SAW NEWS REPORTING TODAY THAT
THE CHINESE VICE MINISTER HAS
SPOKEN SEPARATELY TO THE U.S.
AMBASSADOR, THE NORTH KOREAN
AMBASSADOR AND SOUTH KOREAN
AMBASSADOR.
THAT'S A GOOD SIGN.
THERE NEEDS TO BE A PATHWAY OFF
OF THIS RHETORIC BY NORTH KOREAS
AND HOPEFULLY THE CHINESE CAN
PROVIDE SOME EFFORT IN THIS
REGARD.
>> Ifill: AMBASSADOR JACK IT
ARE CHARD, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE, THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE "NEWSHOUR": ASSESSING THE
SAFETY OF OIL PIPELINES; CUTTING
FUNDING FOR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH;
TEACHING CREATIVITY AND
COMMUNICATION SKILLS; RELEASING
A CONVICT AFTER 42 YEARS AND
LEARNING LESSONS ABOUT BULLYING
FROM SHAKESPEARE.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: AT LEAST 53
PEOPLE DIED IN A TALIBAN ATTACK
IN WESTERN AFGHANISTAN TODAY.
34 OF THE VICTIMS WERE
CIVILIANS, ACCORDING TO AN
AFGHAN PROVINCIAL GOVERNOR.
SUICIDE BOMBERS DRESSED AS
AFGHAN TROOPS RAIDED A
COURTHOUSE IN FARAH PROVINCE IN
AN UNSUCCESSFUL ATTEMPT TO FREE
INSURGENTS ON TRIAL.
AFGHAN FORCES FIRED BACK IN A
GUNBATTLE THAT RAGED FOR MOST OF
THE DAY.
IT WAS THE LARGEST DEATH TOLL
FROM A SINGLE ATTACK IN
AFGHANISTAN SINCE 2011.
TENSIONS FLARED BETWEEN
PALESTINIANS AND ISRAELIS IN THE
HEAVIEST EXCHANGE OF GUNFIRE
SINCE A TRUCE LAST NOVEMBER.
PALESTINIAN MILITANTS FIRED
SEVERAL ROCKETS INTO SOUTHERN
ISRAELND I ASRAELI AIRCRAFT
FOUGHT BACK, BOMBING TARGETS IN
THE GAZA STRIP.
THE STRIKES COINCIDED WITH
UNREST IN THE WEST BANK, WHERE
PALESTINIANS PROTESTED THE DEATH
OF A PRISONER WHO DIED OF CANCER
WHILE IN ISRAELI CUSTODY.
THEY ACCUSED ISRAEL OF NOT
GIVING HIM PROPER MEDICAL CARE.
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY LEAVES FOR A TRIP TOHE T
MIDDLE EAST THIS WEEKEND.
TORRENTIAL RAINFALL IN ARGENTINA
LED TO MASSIVE FLOODING TODAY,
KILLING AT LEAST 41 PEOPLE.
MOST OF THE DEATHS WERE IN THE
EASTERN CITY OF LA PLATA IN
BUENOS AIRES PROVINCE.
PEOPLE THERE DROWNED AFTER
TAKING REFUGE IN THEIR CARS
OVERNIGHT.
THE FLOODING COMPLETELY COVERED
STREETS, LEFT THOUSANDS STRANDED
AND SET OFF A FIRE AT THE
NATION'S LARGEST OIL REFINERY
THAT TOOK HOURS TO PUT OUT.
THE DOWNPOUR DROPPED NEARLY 16
INCHES OF RAIN ON THE REGION IN
TWO HOURS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HEADED TO
COLORADO TODAY TO DRAW ATTENTION
TO THAT STATE'S NEWLY PASSED GUN
LAWS.
COLORADO EXPANDED BACKGROUND
CHECKS AND PUT RESTRICTIONS ON
MAGAZINE SIZE.
CONGRESS TAKES UP GUN
LEGISLATION WHEN IT RETURNS FROM
RECESS NEXT WEEK.
THE PRESIDENT MET WITH LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS AT THE
DENVER POLICE ACADEMY AND THEN
MADE HIS CASE FOR TOUGHER
NATIONAL LAWS.
>> SURELY WE CAN HAVE A DEBATE
THAT'S NOT BASED ON THE NOTION
SOMEHOW THAT YOUR ELECTED
REPRESENTATIVES ARE TRYING TO DO
SOMETHING TO YOU OTHER THAN
POTENTIALLY PREVENT ANOTHER
GROUP OF FAMILIES FROM GRIEVING
THE WAY THE FAMILIES OF AURORA
OR NEWTOWN OR COLUMBINE HAVE
GRIEVED.
>> Sreenivasan: CONNECTICUT'S
GENERAL ASSEMBLY MOVED TOWARD
PASSING A TOUGH NEW SET OF GUN
CONTROLS.
MEMBERS DEBATED THE LEGISLATION
TODAY, SOME OF WHICH WILL TAKE
EFFECT IMMEDIATELY.
IT INCLUDES AN EXPANSION OF THE
STATE'S ASSAULT WEAPONS BAN AND
BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR ALL
FIREARMS SALES.
GOVERNOR DANNEL MALLOY HAS SAID
HE'LL SIGN THE LEGISLATION INTO
LAW.
IT WAS WIDELY REPORTED TODAY
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS RETURNING 5%
OF HIS SALARY TO THE TREASURY
EACH MONTH FOR THE REST OF THE
YEAR.
THE PRESIDENT EARNS $400,000
ANNUALLY.
A WHITE HOUSE OFFICIAL SAID IT'S
A SHOW OF SUPPORT FOR THOUSANDS
OF FEDERAL WORKERS WHO FACE
FURLOUGH BECAUSE OF AUTOMATIC
SPENDING CUTS.
DEFENSE SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL IS
ALSO TAKING A VOLUNTARY PAY CUT
IN SOLIDARITY WITH THE
PENTAGON'S MANY CIVILIAN
EMPLOYEES REQUIRED TO TAKE
UNPAID LEAVE.
STOCKS FELL SHARPLY ON WALL
STREET TODAY, WITH THE DOW
RECORDING ITS WORST DAY IN MORE
THAN A MONTH.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST MORE THAN 111 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 14,550.
THE NASDAQ FELL 36 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,218.
KOREAN AUTOMAKERS HYUNDAI AND
KIA ARE RECALLING NEARLY TWO
MILLION VEHICLES ACROSS THE U.S.
BECAUSE OF PROBLEMS WITH AIR
BAGS AND BRAKE LIGHT SWITCHES.
THE SWITCH RECALL AFFECTS MOST
OF THE AUTOMAKERS' LINEUPS FROM
MODEL YEARS 2007 THROUGH 2011.
THE AIR BAG PROBLEM IS ON ABOUT
200,000 HYUNDAI ELANTRAS.
BOTH COMPANIES SAID THERE HAVE
BEEN NO PORTRES OF CRASHES OR
INJURIES.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, HOW AN OIL
SPILL NEAR LITTLE ROCK,
ARKANSAS, IS CASTING A SHADOW
OVER THE PROPOSED EXPANSION OF
THE KEYSTONE PIPELINE.
>> SO THAT IS A PIPELINE THAT
HAS BUSTED AND HAS FLOODED THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> Woodruff: A LOCAL RESIDENT
DESCRIBED THE SCENE IN THE SMALL
TOWN OF MAYFLOWER, ON FRIDAY
AFTER EXXON'S PEGASUS PIPELINE
RUPTURED CLOSE TO HIS HOME.
>> I MEAN, LOOK!
INCREDIBLE AND THAT IS OIL.
>> Woodruff: AND NOT JUST ANY
OIL-- A TYPE OF HEAVY CRUDE
CALLED DILUTED BITUMEN, FROM THE
TAR SANDS OF WESTERN CANADA AND
SIMILAR TO WHAT THE PROPOSED
KEYSTONE X.L. PIPELINE WOULD
CARRY.
RUNNING FROM PATOKA, ILLINOIS TO
NEDERLAND, TEXAS, THE PEGASUS
PIPELINE IS CAPABLE OF
TRANSPORTING 96,000 BARRELS OF
OIL A DAY.
IT PASSES THROUGH THIS LITTLE
ROCK SUBURB, AND ALSO THROUGH 13
MILES OF THE CLOSE BY LAKE
MAUMELLE WATERSHED, LEAVING MANY
CONCERNED WITH THE RISKS POSED
TO ARKANSAS' WATER SUPPLY.
YESTERDAY AT A BIRD SHELTER IN
NEARBY RUSSELLVILLE, SPECIALISTS
CLEANED DUCKS COVERED IN THE
HEAVY CRUDE.
INVESTIGATORS ARE STILL TRYING
TO FIND OUT WHAT CAUSED THE
RUPTURE.
ACCORDING TO EXXON'S ESTIMATES,
BETWEEN 3,500 AND 5,000 BARRELS
OF OIL SPILLED.
MORE THAN 20 HOMES WERE
EVACUATED.
LAST YEAR IN THE U.S., 364
PIPELINE SPILLS OCCURRED,
RESULTING IN THE DUMPING OF
54,000 BARRELS OF OIL, ACCORDING
TO THE DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION.
THE LATEST BREACH, WHILE
CONSIDERED RELATIVELY SMALL,
RAISES NEW QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
PROPOSED KEYSTONE X.L. PIPELINE
EXTENSION AND WHETHER PRESIDENT
OBAMA SHOULD APPROVE IT.
IT WOULD CARRY 800,000 BARRELS A
DAY OF DILUTED BITUMEN CRUDE
OVER 1,700 MILES, FROM THE TAR
SANDS OF WESTERN CANADA TO
REFINERIES ON THE GULF COAST OF
TEXAS.
ENVIRONMENTALISTS WORRY ABOUT
POTENTIAL SPILLS, RUPTURES, AND
HIGHER GASEOUS EMISSIONS FROM
THE USE OF TAR SANDS OIL.
TRANSCANADA CORPORATION AND
OTHERS HAVE BEEN AWAITING
APPROVAL FOR FOUR YEARS TO MOVE
AHEAD WITH THE PROJECT.
A FINAL DECISION FROM THE
PRESIDENT IS EXPECTED THIS
SUMMER.
WE EXAMINE SOME OF THE QUESTIONS
RAISED IN THE WAKE OF THIS SPILL
WITH ANTHONY SWIFT, AN ATTORNEY
WHO CLOSELY FOLLOWS PIPELINE
SAFETY FOR THE NATURAL RESOURCES
DEFENSE COUNCIL OR N.R.D.C.
AND ANDREW BLACK, THE PRESIDENT
OF THE ASSOCIATION OF OIL
PIPELINES.
FOR THE RECORD, B.P. IS A MEMBER
OF THAT GROUP AND A "NEWSHOUR"
UNDERWRITER.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
SO ANDY BLACK, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
HOW SERIOUS IS THIS PIPELINE
RUPTURE NEAR LITTLE ROCK.
>> WELL, NO MATTER HOW RARE A
PIPELINE ACCIDENT IS, YOU DON'T
WANT TO SEE A SCENE LIKE THAT.
WHAT AN OPERATOR WANTS TO DO IS
RESPOND QUICKLY, CLEAN UP, AND
TRY TO LEARN THE CAUSE.
AS YOU SAID, WE DON'T KNOW THE
CAUSE YET.
WE WANT TO SHARE THAT THAT
INFORMATION TO CONTINUE
IMPROVING THE SAFETY RECORDS OF
PIPELINES WHICH ARE THE SAFEST
METHOD OF TRANSPORTING CRUDE
OIL.
>> Woodruff: ANTHONY SWIFT,
HOW SERIOUS DO YOU THINK THIS
PARTICULAR INCIDENT IS.
>> WELL, THIS WAS A SPILL OF UP
TO 200,000 GALLONS OF TAR SANDS
CRUDE.
WE SAW IT GOING THROUGH A
SUBURBAN COMMUNITY IN ARKANSAS.
IT'S A VERY SERIOUS SPILL.
E.P.A. CONSIDERS IT A SERIOUS
SPILL AND, YOU KNOW, FRANKLY, WE
FOUND THAT WITH TAR SANDS SPILLS
THESE ARE SPILLS THAT ARE MORE
DIFFICULT TO CLEAN.
A SIMILAR SPILL IN KALAMAZOO,
MICHIGAN, BECAME THE MOST
EXPENSIVE ON SHORE PIPELINE
SPILL IN HISTORY, MUCH BECAUSE
OF THE UNIQUE BEHAVIOR OF TAR
SANDS WHEN IT SPILLS.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ARE YOU
SAYING?
THAT THERE'S SOMETHING
PARTICULARLY COMPLICATED ABOUT
THIS KIND OF OIL?
>> THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT.
THE TAR SANDS CRUDE IS A CRUDE
THAT HAS NOT -- IS NOT SIMILAR
TO THE CRUDES HISTORICALLY MOVED
ON THE U.S. PIPELINE SYSTEMS.
IT'S BASICALLY A MIXTURE OF VERY
THICK BITUMEN, WHICH IS SOLID AT
ROOM TEMPERATURE AND VOLATILE
PETROCHEMICALS THAT ARE VERY
TOXIC ONCE THEY REACH THE AIR.
AND ONCE SPILLED YOU HAVE A
GASOFF OF THE PETROCHEMICALS
THAT EXPOSE RESIDENTS TO TOXINS
AND THE BITUMEN ITSELF THEN
BECOMES HEAVIER.
IF IT REACHES A WATER BODY IT
FLOWS UNDERNEATH IT.
IT'S HARD TO CONTROL.
>> Woodruff: ANDY BLACK, HOW
MUCH MORE COMPLICATED, HOW MUCH
RISK SKWRER IT TO BE SENDING
THIS KIND OF BITUMEN CRUDE
ACROSS THE COUNTRY?
>> IT'S NO MORE COMPLICATED,
JUDY.
AND U.S. PIPELINE INCIDENT
RECORD SHOW THAT.
WITH MORE THAN 40 YEARS OF
MOVING CRUDE OIL FROM THE
CANADIAN OIL SANDS THERE'S NOT
BEEN ONE PIPELINE ACCIDENT IN
THE UNITED STATES CAUSED BY
THAT.
AND -- CAUSED BY THE TYPE OF
CRUDE FROM THE CANADIAN OIL
SANDS.
AND THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE,
WHEN THEY'VE BEEN EXHAUSTIVELY
REVIEWING THE X.L.
PIPELINE HAVE SIMPLY FOUND
THERE'S NO MORE CORROSIVE
ELEMENTS OF CRUDE FROM WESTERN
CANADA AS THERE ARE FROM
CALIFORNIA, VENEZUELA, MEXICO.
CRUDE HAS BEEN SAFELY MOVED FOR
DECADES.
>> Woodruff: IF IT'S THE CASE,
WHY THE ADDITIONAL CONCERN ON
THE PARENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
GROUPS?
>> IT'S SIMPLY NOT TRUE.
WE SAW WITH THE KALAMAZOO SPL,IL
800,000 GALLONS WERE SPILLED
FROM EXTERNAL CORROSION.
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT CAUSED THE
PEGASUS SPILL BUT WE KNOW THE
PIPELINE IS MOVING TAR SANDS
DILUTED BITUMEN HAVE HAD POOR
SAFETY RECORDS.
THE FIRST SHIPMENTS CAME IN THE
LATE '90s INTO THE NORTHERN
MIDWEST.
THOSE PIPELINES NOW OVER THE
LAST THREE YEARS HAVE SPILLED
3.6 TIMES AS MUCH CRUDE OIL PER
PIPELINE MILE AS THE NATIONAL
AVERAGE.
>> Woodruff: IN FACT, WE WERE
SEEING, ANDY BLACK, AS WE JUST
REPORTED, 364 SPILLS OR RUPTURES
IN THE COUNTRY LAST YEAR, AND
YOU HEARD THAT NUMBER OF JUST
THIS PARTICULAR KIND OF TAR
SANDS CRUDE.
IT SOUNDS LIKE THE TWO OF YOU
ARE SAYING DOESN'T RECONCILE.
>> WELL, TWO THINGS, FIRST I'D
LIKE TO PUT THAT NUMBER IN
CONTEXT.
THE 54,000 BARRELS SPILLED LAST
YEAR.
THAT'S OUT OF 11.3 BILLION
BARRELS OF CRUDE OIL MOVED
SAFELY LAST YEAR.
CRUDE OIL AND REFINED PETROLEUM
PRODUCTS.
A RELIABLE RECORD THAT'S
99.9995%.
AS TO THE ACCIDENT IN MICHIGAN,
AS MR. SWIFT MENTIONED, THAT IT
WAS AN EXTERNAL CORROSION CAUSED
ACCIDENT WHICH THE NATIONAL
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD SAID
HAD NOTHING TO DO WITH THE TYPE
OF CRUDE THAT IT WAS CARRYING.
>> Woodruff: EXTERNAL
CORROSION MEANING THE OUTSIDE OF
THE PIPELINE RATHER THAN WHAT
WAS FLOWING THROUGH IT?
>> EXACTLY.
IF THERE WAS A PROBLEM WITH
CANADIAN OIL SANDS WITH
CORROSION IT WOULD HAVE CAUSED
AN INTERNAL CORROSION ACCIDENT
AND IT DIDN'T.
AND KNOW NO PIPELINE ACCIDENTS
FROM INTERNAL CORROSION HAVE
OCCURRED ON PIPELINES CARRYING
THAT CRUDE FROM CANADA.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT THAT?
BECAUSE THAT BEARS DIRTLYEC ON
WHAT MIGHT HAPPEN WITH THE
KEYSTONE PIPELINE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND WE FLOW SMALL SET OF
CALIFORNIA PIPELINES THAT HIGHER
TEMPERATURE PIPELINES SPILL MORE
FREQUENTLY DUE TO EXTERNAL
CORROSION THAN CONVENTIONAL
PIPELINES.
IF THEY'RE OVER 100 DEGREES THEY
SPILL UP TO 23 TIMES AS OFTEN
DUE TO EXTERNAL CORROSION.
>> Woodruff: SO YOU'RE SAYING
WHAT IS GOING THROUGH THE
PIPELINE AFFECTS WHAT'S
HAPPENING --
>> AROUND THE PIPELINE.
>> Woodruff: OUTSIDE OF IT.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT THE STATE
DEPARTMENT STUDY-- NOT OURS, THE
STATE DEPARTMENT'S-- THEY SAY
YOU NEED TO LOOK AT THAT
CALIFORNIA STUDY WITH CAUTION.
THOSE ARE DIFFERENT DESIGN KHARK
CHARACTERISTICS ON A PIPELINE.
AGAIN, NO ACCIDENTS ON U.S.
PIPELINE CARRYING OIL SANDS
CRUDE CAUSED BY OIL STANDS
CRUDE.
>> HE'S STATING THAT AS A FACT.
>> AND IT'S NOT.
THE N.T.S.B. DID NOT SAY THAT
THE CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH THE
PIPELINE WAS OPERATED BASED ON
WHAT THE CRUDE -- WHAT CRUDE IT
WAS CARRYING HAD NOTHING TO DO
WITH THE ACCIDENT.
IT JUST DIDN'T WEIGH INTO IT.
AND THE STATE DEPARTMENT HASN'T
STUDIED THIS ISSUE.
PIPELINE REGULATORS HAVE SAID
THEY HAVEN'T STUDIED THIS ISSUE.
IN FACT, THE HEAD PIPELINE
REGULATOR TOLD CONGRESS IN 2011
THAT HER AGENCY COULDN'T
GUARANTEE THAT REGULATIONS WERE
STRONG ENOUGH FOR DILUTED
BITUMEN PIPELINES.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU WANT TO
RESPOND TO THAT?
>> I'M NOT GOING TO DISAGREE
WITH THE CHAIRWOMAN OF THE
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY
BOARD.
AND THIS ISSUE IS BEING STUDIED
BY THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES.
IF IT'S DONE FAIRLY-- AS I
BELIEVE IT WILL BE-- IT WILL
SHOW WHAT THE DECADES OF
EXPERIENCE HAVE SHOWED US: THAT
THERE'S NOT A CONCERN FOR
CORROSION.
IT'S IN MORE CORROSIVE THAN ANY
HEAVY CRUDE.
>> Woodruff: SOME PEOPLE LOOK
AT WHAT'S HAPPENING WITH THE
PIPELINES THAT RUN ACROSS THIS
COUNTRY AND SAY IT'S INEVITABLE
THAT THEY'RE GOING TO BE SOME
SPILLS, SOME RUPTURES, JUST BY
THE VERY NATURE OF WHAT'S GOING
THROUGH THESE LINES.
>> WELL, WE'VE SEEN -- I MEAN,
THE QUESTION IS, ARE THE RISKS
WORTH THE BENEFITS?
YOU TAKE A LOOK AT PEGASUS AND
KEYSTONE X.L . PEGASUS IS A
PIPELINE A TENTH OF THE CAPACITY
OF KEYSTONE X.L . YOU BUILD
KEYSTONE KP +*L YOU HAVE A TEN
TIMES MORE SIGNIFICANT RISK?
F THERE IS A SPILL AND WHAT IS
THE BENEFIT TO THE U.S. PUBLIC?
YOU'RE DEALING WITH A
LOW-QUALITY CRUDE THAT INCREASES
CLIMATE EMISSIONS WELL
CONVENTIONAL CRUDE, HAS
INCREASED RISK TO U.S. WATER
BODIES AND COMMUNITIES AND IS
MEANT TO GO THROUGH THE U.S. IN
ORDER TO BRING TAR SANDS TO GULF
COAST REFINERIES WHICH ARE NOW
EXPORTS OVER THREE MILLION
BARRELS A DAY OF REFINED
PRODUCTS.
>> Woodruff: SO HE'S MAKING
THE ARGUMENT AGAINST THE
KEYSTONE X.L. PIPELINE -- OR
EXPANDING IT.
>> WE HAVE NOT REACHED THE GOAL
YET OF ZERO PIPELINE ACCIDENTS.
THE INDUSTRY WORKS HARD FOR
THAT.
THE SAFETY RECORD HAS IMPROVED.
OVER THE LAST TEN YEARS THE
NUMBER OF ACCIDENTS PER MILES OF
PIPE HAS DROPPED 60%.
THE INDUSTRY SPENT 1.1 BILLION
DOLLARS IN JUST 2011 ON THIS.
IT CONTINUES TO WORK EVERYDAY ON
THIS.
>> Woodruff: MAKING SAFER
PIPELINES?
WORKING ON THE OIL?
HOW?
HOW ARE THEY SAFER?
>> WE'RE BUILDING PIPELINES
TODAY SAFER THAN EVER BEFORE
USING MODERN TECHNIQUES, MODERN
COATING, MODERN WELDING
PRACTICES AND THAT'S WHAT
KEYSTONE X.L. WILL HAVE.
BUT ALSO THE TECHNOLOGY IS
IMPROVING TO INSPECT PIPELINES
AND LEARN MORE ABOUT WHAT IS
HAPPENING.
ALL OF THAT IS CONTRIBUTING TO
-- AGAIN, THAT'S 60% DROP IN
ACCIDENTS OVER THE LAST TEN
YEARS.
>> Woodruff: GO AHEAD.
>> I WAS JUST GOING SAY JUST
TAKE A LOOK AT TRANS-CANADA'S
FIRST PIPELINE, KEYSTONE 1 IN
THE MIDWEST.
IT WAS A NEW PIPELINE IN 2010
AND IT SPILLED 14 YEARS IN ITS
FIRST YEAR OF OPERATION AND HAD
TO BE SHUT DOWN BY FEDERAL
REGULATORS.
>> IT HAS HAD A COUPLE OF
ACCIDENTS AT FACILITIES.
THE PIPELINE RIGHT OF WAY HAS
NEVER BEEN AFFECTED, THE
INTEGRITY OF THAT PIPELINE HAS
NOT BEEN FOUND AT FAULT YET.
I'D LIKE THAT ADD, AS YOU WERE
MENTIONING, ABOUT KEYSTONE X.L.
AND ANTHONY, THE PIPELINE SHOULD
BE CONSIDERED AS AN ALTERNATIVE
TO OTHER MODE OF TRANSPORTING
CRUDE OIL, WHICH OUR COUNTRY
NEED, THAT CAN MOVE ON RAIL,
TRUCK, BARGE.
NOBODY DISPUTES THAT PIPELINES
ARE THE SAFEST METHOD SO IF
WE'RE GOING TO BE BRINGING THOSE
BARRELS OF CRUDE OIL INTO THE
U.S., IT SHOULD BE ON A
PIPELINE.
>> Woodruff: WE'RE GOING TO
LEAVE IT THERE.
ANDREW BLACK, ANTHONY SWIFT,
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Ifill: NOW, OUR CONTINUING
COVERAGE ON THE IMPACT OF ACROSS
THE BOARD FEDERAL SPENDING CUTS
KICKING IN THIS SPRING IN
WASHINGTON AND AROUND THE
NATION.
TONIGHT, JEFFREY BROWN LOOKS AT
WHAT IT MEANS FOR SCIENCE AND
RESEARCH.
>> Brown: IN THE WORLD OF
SCIENCE, THE GOVERNMENT IS A BIG
PLAYER-- DISBURSING MONEY FOR
GRANTS AND RESEARCH.
WITH MOST FEDERAL AGENCIES SET
TO SEE REDUCTIONS OF ROUGHLY 5%
OF SPENDING.
THAT WILL MEAN CUTS FOR THE
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH,
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL,
THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY, NASA
AND OTHER KEY PLAYERS.
MATT HOURIHAN HAS BEEN TRACKING
THE IMMEDIATE AND POTENTIAL
IMPACT.
HE'S DIRECTOR OF THE R&D BUDGET
AND POLICY PROGRAM AT THE
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE.
WELCOME TO YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: GENERALLY SPEAKING,
HOW BIG A DEAL IS IN IN THE
WORLD OF GOVERNMENT-SUPPORTED
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN.
>> IT'S A VERY BIG DEAL.
A VERY BIG DEAL.
WE'RE LOOKING AT ROUGHLY $9.5
BILLION WORTH OF R&D CUTS THIS
YEAR AS A RESULT OF
SEQUESTRATION.
IT'S ABOUT -- THOSE ARE CUTS
ADDING UP TO ALMOST 7%.
THESE ARE THE LARGEST CUTS WE'VE
AN ACTUALLY MEAN?
A SINGLE YEAR IN 40 YEARS.
>> Brown: THOSE ARE BIG
NUMBERS.
EXPLAIN HOW THE FUNDING WORKS,
MAYBE THROUGH A SPECIFIC EXAMPLE
OR TWO.
>> SURE.
WELL, THERE ARE A NUMBER OF
DIFFERENT AGENCIES THAT HAVE
LARGE SCIENCE PORTFOLIOS.
SO EACH ONE OF THOSE AGENCIES
RECEIVES ITS FUNDING FROM
CONGRESS EVERY YEAR.
AND THERE ARE A NUMBER OF
COMPETITIVE GRANT PROGRAMS AND
OTHER MECHANISMS BY WHICH THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT PROVIDES R&D
FUNDING TO RESEARCHERS AT
UNIVERSITIES AND ELSEWHERE.
AGAIN, GENERALLY THROUGH A
COMPETITIVE GRANT PROCESS AND
OTHER MECHANISMS.
AND SEQUESTRATION ESSENTIALLY
LOPS OFF ABOUT -- ALMOST 7% OF
THAT FUNDING THAT'S AVAILABLE.
SO, YOU KNOW, RATHER THAN THE
$140 BILLION TYPICAL OF FEDERAL
R&D IN RECENT YEARS WE'RE GOING
SEE MORE LIKE $130 BILLION.
>> Pelley: GOING TO SEE MORE.
ARE THEY FEELING IT ALREADY?
ARE THEY TAKING ACTION ALREADY?
>> SOME ARE.
SOME ARE.
FOR INSTANCE, WE KNOW N.I.H.,
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH --
>> Brown: WHICH IS A HUGE
PLAYER?
RIGHT?
A LOT OF MONEY.
>> IT'S THE LARGEST NONDEFENSE
FUNDER OF FEDERAL R&D IN
GOVERNMENT AND LIFE SCIENCES
SPECIFICALLY.
WE KNOW THEY'VE SAID THEY ARE
GOING TO REDUCE FUNDING FOR
CONTINUING GRANTS BY ABOUT 10%.
THAT'S GOING TO CONTINUE.
AND WHAT THAT MEANS IS THAT
RESEARCHERS AT UNIVERSITIES --
AND N.I.H. PRIMARILY FUNDS
UNIVERSITY RESEARCH --
RESEARCHERS AT UNIVERSITIES ARE
GOING TO HAVE TO CHANGE THEIR
PLANS WHEN IT COMES TO THEIR OWN
RESEARCH PROJECTS.
WE'RE LIKELY GOING TO SEE FEWER
OPPORTUNITIES FOR POSTDOCS AND
GRADUATE ASSISTANTS.
SO THAT'S KIND OF -- N.I.H. IS
CERTAINLY THE BIG PLAYER.
THERE ARE MANY OTHERS AS WELL.
>> Brown: DOES N.I.H. CONTROL
-- MAKE THOSE DECISIONS ABOUT
WHERE THE MONEY IS GOING TO GO
OR NOT GOING TO GO?
>> YES.
N.I.H. HAS A COMPETITIVE PEER
REVIEW PROCESS SO A NUMBER OF
EXPERTS LOOK AT EACH PROPOSAL
AND RATE THEM BASED ON
SCIENTIFIC MERIT.
AND SO IT DOES COME DOWN TO
N.I.H. HOW MANY GRANTS ARE GOING
TO BE FUNDED, WHAT KINDS OF
GRANTS, WHAT SUBJECT AREAS.
WHAT'S NOT UP TO THEM IS THE
AMOUNT OF FUNDING THEY HAVE TO
DISTRIBUTE.
THAT COMES DOWN TO CONGRESS.
>> Brown: THE ARGUMENT OUT
THERE-- AND WE'VE HEARD IT ON
THE PROGRAM MANY TIMES-- IS THAT
SPENDING IS OUT OF CONTROL, THAT
EVERYBODY HAS TO TAKE A CUT, HAS
TO TIGHTEN THEIR BELT.
THIS AREA AS WELL AS MANY OTHER
AREAS ACROSS THE BOARD IN
GOVERNMENT.
WHAT'S THE RESPONSE BEEN TO THAT
IN THE SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY.
>> THERE'S A COUPLE RESPONSES.
FOR ONE THING, IN THE PAST FEW
YEARS FEDERAL R&D HAS ALREADY
DECLINED BY ABOUT 10%.
WE PEAKED AT ABOUT $155 BILLION
IN 2010.
WE'RE DOWN ABOUT -- BEFORE
SEQUESTRATION WE WERE DOWN 10%
FROM THAT HIGH WATERMARK.
SO WE'VE ALREADY SEEN QUITE A
BIT OF BELT TIGHTENING ON THE
PART OF FEDERAL SCIENCE AGENCIES
AND RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS WHO
ARE TRYING TO PLAN THEIR OWN
PROJECT TRAJECTORIES.
SO WE'RE KIND OF AT A POINT NOW
WHERE THERE ISN'T A WHOLE LOT OF
FAT LEFT TO CUT.
AND WE'RE CUTTING PAST THE FAT
INTO THE MUSCLE.
THE OTHER THING I'D MENTIONED IS
THAT SEQUESTRATION ONLY ACTUALLY
COVERS ABOUT ONE-THIRD OF THE
FEDERAL BUDGET.
TWO-THIRDS OF THE FEDERAL
BUDGET-- WHICH IS WHAT'S KNOWN
AS MANDATORY SPENDING,
ENTITLEMENTS, THINGS ALONG THOSE
LINES-- DOESN'T GET TOUCHED BY
SEQUESTRATION BUT THAT PART OF
THE BUDGET IS WHAT'S DRIVING
DEFICIT GROWTH.
>> Brown: WOULD PRIVATELY
FUNDED RESEARCH NOT STEP INTO
THE BREACH AT LEAST IN SOME
CASES OF RESEARCH?
>> PROBABLY NOT.
PERHAPS TO SOME EXTENT.
THERE IS A LOT OF TALK IN THE
UNIVERSITY COMMUNITY ABOUT
BETTER PARTNERING WITH PRIVATE
INDUSTRY TO HELP FUND RESEARCH.
THE PROBLEM WITH THAT, THOUGH,
IS THAT PRIVATE R&D IS VERY
DIFFERENT FROM PUBLIC R&D.
PRIVATE R&D, INDUSTRIAL R&D
TENDS TO BE MUCH MORE FOCUSED ON
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT, IT'SLESS
RISKY, IT'S SHORT TERM, IT'S
GEARED TOWARDS REALIZING RETURNS
IN THE NEAR TERM WHEREAS PUBLIC
R&D IS MUCH MORE FOCUSED ON THE
KINDS OF BASIC AND APPLIED
RESEARCH PROJECTS THAT ARE MUCH
MORE LONGER TERM IN NATURE, HIGH
RISK, AND, FRANKLY, TOO RISKY
FOR THE PRIVATE SECTOR.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK YOU VERY,
VERY BRIEFLY.
IS THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY
GEARING UP TO FIGHT IN THIS IN
SOME SENSE OR THEY'RE GIVING
INTO IT AND PREPARING FOR WAYS
TO DEAL WITH IT?
>> A LITTLE BIT OF BOTH.
RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS ARE
CHANGING THEIR PLANS.
THE NUMBER OF UNIVERSITIES THAT
ARE -- WE KNOW ARE SCALING BACK
THEIR ADMISSIONS GIVEN THE
SPECTER OF REDUCED FUNDING.
AT THE SAME TIME, WE DO BELIEVE
THAT WHAT'S NEEDED IS A MORE
BALANCED APPROACH TO DEFICIT
REDUCTION.
THAT'S BEEN THE BIG PROBLEM SO
FAR.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT, MATT
HUMAN, THANK YOHOURIHAN HAN, THY
MUCH.
>> Woodruff: IT'S SCIENCE
WEDNESDAY ONLINE.
READ ABOUT THE IMPACT OF CUTS ON
BREAST CANCER EXPERIMENTS AND
RESEARCH ON RARE DISEASES.
>> Ifill: THE CHEATING SCANDAL
IN ATLANTA IS PROMPTING
QUESTIONS AGAIN ABOUT TESTING
AND WHETHER PUBLIC SCHOOLS ARE
TOO FOCUSED ON TEACHING TO THE
TEST.
BUT SOME PLACES ARE TRYING NEW
APPROACHES.
THE "NEWSHOUR'S" SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT FOR EDUCATION,
JOHN MERROW, VISITED ANOTHER
SCHOOL DISTRICT IN THE SOUTH TO
SEE ITS MODEL.
>> Reporter: ODDS ARE STUDENTS
IN DANVILLE, KENTUCKY ARE
ATTENDING CLASSES THAT DO NOT
LOOK LIKE THE ONES YOU REMEMBER.
THEY'RE LEARNING HOW TO MAKE A
GUITAR, DESIGN A PRESENTATION,
DEBATE AN ARGUMENT AND MORE.
>> DO YOU KNOW WHAT GERMS ARE?
>> Reporter: JAYDEN MAYS AND HER
CLASSMATES CREATED A PROJECT FOR
THEIR SCIENCE CLASS, USING
GLITTER TO TEACH PRE-SCHOOLERS
HOW GERMS SPREAD.
>> SO THERE ARE GOING TO BE OUR
GERMS, YOU ARE GOING TO ACT LIKE
THESE ARE GERMS, OKAY?
SO HALEY SNEEZED IN HER HAND AND
SHE DIDN'T WASH HER HANDS AND
NOW SHE'S GOING TO SHAKE HANDS
WITH EVERYBODY SO SHAKE HALEY'S
HAND.
LOOK AT ALL THE LITTLE GERMS.
>> Reporter: THIS IS NOT JUST
SCIENCE.
THESE SEVENTH GRADERS ARE
LEARNING ANOTHER SET OF SKILLS:
CREATIVITY, COMMUNICATION AND
TEAMWORK.
SO YOU WEREN'T JUST PLAYING?
>> NO, WE WERE ACTUALLY TEACHING
THEM LES ASON IN A FUN WAY.
>> Reporter: WHY MAKE IT FUN?
>> THEY WOULD ENJOY IT MORE AND
IT WOULD STAY IN THEIR MINDS
BECAUSE THEY WOULD REMEMBER, "OH
THAT WAS FUN, I ENJOYED THAT."
>> Reporter: THIS SEEMINGLY
SIMPLE LESSON IS AN EXAMPLE OF
SOMETHING FAR MORE COMPLICATED,
CALLED PROJECT BASED LEARNING.
IT'S ONE OF MANY CHANGES
HAPPENING IN A SCHOOL DISTRICT
THAT WANTS TO SPEND LESS TIME
TESTING AND MORE ON WHAT IS NOW
BEING CALLED DEEPER LEARNING.
ONLY ABOUT 1% OF SCHOOLS
NATIONWIDE ARE COMMITTED TO THIS
APPROACH.
DANVILLE IS A SMALL DISTRICT
WITH JUST 1,800 STUDENTS, 60% OF
WHOM LIVE IN LOW INCOME
HOUSEHOLDS.
BUT IT'S GOT BIG PLANS.
DANVILLE WANTS TO DO SOMETHING
THAT FEW, IF ANY, TRADITIONAL
HOOSCL DISTRICTS HAVE EVER DONE:
TRANSFORM TEACHING AND LEARNING
IN EVERY CLASSROOM.
FOR THIS TO WORK, EVERYTHING AND
EVERYONE HAS TO CHANGE.
PARENTS HAVE TO GET ON BOARD.
TEACHERS NEED TO LEARNEW N WAYS
OF TEACHING.
STUDENTS MUST ADAPT TO NEW WAYS
OF LEARNING.
AND TEST SCORES CAN'T BE
IF THEY GO DOWN, THE REFORMS
WON'T LAST.
PARENTS ARE OFTEN THE HARDEST TO
CONVINCE THAT CHANGE IS
NECESSARY, BUT NOT IN DANVILLE.
>> WE WERE A PART OF A GROUP OF
PARENTS WHO CAME TOGETHER AND
SAID, "ENOUGH IS ENOUGH.
WE WANT BETTER FOR OUR
STUDENTS."
>> Reporter: SCHOOL REFORM IS
USUALLY A LAST RESORT: THINGS
GET SO BAD THAT SCHOOLS HA NOVE
OTHER OPTION.
ALTHOUGH DANVILLE'S TEST SCORES
WERE BELOW THE STATE AVERAGE,
THE STATE ISN'T MAKING THEM
CHANGE, DANVILLE WANTS TO DO
THINGS DIFFERENTLY.
>> THE WORLD IS CHANGING.
AND I THINK AS... AS OUR KIDS
GET OLDER AND THEN TRY TO TAKE
ON LEADERSHIP POSITIONS, JUST
KNOWING FACTS AND INFORMATION
ISN'T GOING TO HELP THEM.
>> TEACHERS ARE... ARE TAUGHT,
ARE FORCED TO TEACH TO THE
TESTS.
I WANT MY KIDS TO DO WELL ON THE
S.A.T. AND A.C.T.
I WANT THEM TO BE IN THE TOP
TEN.
BUT WHAT I REALLY WANT, I WANT
THEM TO BE SUCCESSFUL AFTER THEY
GET OUT OF COLLEGE.
>> Reporter: WHEN WE MET UP WITH
KELLY RANKIN'S SON, JACOB, HE
WAS LEARNING TO MAKE A ROCKET.
>> I LOVE BUILDING, I LOVE
DESIGNING.
I MIGHT WANT TO BE AN ENGINEER
WHEN I GROW UP.
I DON'T KNOW YET, I'M JUST A
FRESHMAN.
>> IT STARTED OUT AS A NICE,
LITTLE PROJECT.
BUT BY THE TIME HE WAS DONE, HE
COULD TELL ME ALL THE EQUATIONS
THAT WENT ALONG WITH IT.
>> THERE'S GOING TO BE PROBLEMS
THAT YOU'D NEVER EVEN THINK OF,
AND THE TEACHER, HE'LL, SAY I
DON'T KNOW.
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
>> KNOWING HOW TO SOLVE A
PROBLEM OR TAKE A PROJECT AND
SAY, "I DON'T KNOW ALL THE...
THE ANSWERS TO THIS.
BUT I KNOW HOW TO WORK WITH
OTHER PEOPLE TO COME TO A
SOLUTION."
THAT'S A LIFE SKILL.
>> Reporter: BASED ON OUR QUICK
SURVEY, PARENTS SEEM
ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT DANVILLE'S
PLAN FOR REFORM.
BUT HOW DO TEACHERS FEEL?
>> IT'S FUN.
THE KIDS LIKE IT.
AND THE TEACHERS LIKE IT AND YOU
KNOW, BEING ACTIVE THE KIDS GET
TO DO STUFF.
>> Reporter: DANNY GOODMAN
TEACHES HIGH SCHOOL PHYSICS.
>> TODAY, THEY WERE DOING MATH.
WE WERE TALKING ABOUT THE GUITA.
AND THEN THEY'VE GOTTA THEN
CALCULATE THE DIFFERENT
POSITIONS OF THE DIFFERENT
FRETTS IN ORDER TO GIVE
DIFFERENT FREQUENCIES.
HOPEFULLY THIS FEELS LIKE FUN
AND THEY DON'T EVEN KNOW THEY'RE
LEARNING.
ARE THEY LEARNING?
YES.
I FEEL LIKE THEY'RE PROBABLY
LEARNING MORE THAN THEY EVER
WOULD-- JUST SITTING THERE
HEARING ME TELL THEM ABOUT A
CERTAIN SECTION OF TEXTBOOK.
>> Reporter: IT MAY BE FUN, BUT
IT'S ALSO A LOT MORE WORK.
MOST TEACHER TRAINING DOESN'T
COVER PROJECT BASED LEARNING,
AND SO TEACHERS LIKE ANDREW
GROVES ARE LEARNING ON THE JOB.
>> PROJECT BASED LEARNING IS
SOMETHING THAT I WASN'T AS
FAMILIAR WITH UNTIL I REALLY
CAME HERE.
AND AS A NEW TEACHER THEY SAID,
"WELL, WHY DON'T YOU GIVE IT A
SHOT, MAKE ONE OF YOUR GEOMETRY
CLASSES PROJECT BASED."
SO I SAID, "OKAY, LET ME TALK TO
SOME TEACHERS WHO HAVE DONE IT."
>> Reporter: THESE 10th AND 11th
GRADERS ARE CREATING CITY
LAYOUTS AND LEARNING BASIC
GEOMETRY IN THE PROCESS.
>> WE LEARNED LINES LIKE
TRANSVERSAL LINES, CONGRUENT
LINES, PARALLEL LINES, WE ALSO
LEARNED LIKE SLOPE LIKE Y=MX+B
AND HOW YOU HAVE TO GRAPH THAT
TO GET YOUR CITY TO COME
TOGETHER.
>> BEING ABLE TO DEMONSTRATE
MASTERY VISUALLY RATHER THAN
A-B-C-D ON A MULTIPLE CHOICE
TEST REALLY SHOWS THAT DEPTH OF
KNOWLEDGE, IT PUSHES THEM TO
LOOK FOR MORE REAL WORLD
APPLICATIONS IN MATHEMATICS.
>> Reporter: BUT COMING UP WITH
CONTENT-RICH PROJECTS THAT
STUDENTS LIKE ISN'T EASY.
>> IT'S A TOUGH JOB, IT'S
SOMETHING THAT-- I'M STILL
LEARNI.NG
I'M LEARNING AS I'M GOING.
>> I THINK IT'S FAIR TO SAY
EVERYONE'S GOING TO VE THAO
CHANGE.
YES.
AND EVERYONE HAS TO SOME DEGREE,
OR SOME HAVE GONE.
>> Reporter: SHE'S NOT KIDDING.
SINCE CARMEN COLEMAN BECAME
SUPERINTENDENT IN 2009, ABOUT
40% OF TH
THE DISTRICT.
SOME BY THEIR OWN CHOICE, SOME
SHOWN THE DOOR.
>> THIS IS NOT FOR EVERYBODY,
BUT THIS IS THE DIRECTION THAT
WE'RE MOVING.
>> Reporter: IT SEEMS TO BE THE
RIGHT DIRECTION.
DANVILLE'S MATH AND READING
SCORES ON STATE TESTS ARE UP
SUBSTANTIALLY.
BUT DANVILLE IS NOT READY TO
CELEBRATE.
>> WE STILL ARE IN THIS OTHER
SYSTEM.
AND WE HAVE TO FOLLOW THE RULES
OF THE OLD SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: THAT'S THE FOURTH
AND FINAL HURDLE, THE TESTS.
TEACHING AND LEARNING SEEM TO BE
STATE IS IN CHARGE OF TESTING.
SO DANVILLE STUDENTS ARE
EXPECTED TO WORK IN TEAMS,
COMMUNICATE EFFECTIVELY AND
LEARN TO THINK CRITICALLY, BUT
STILL BE ABLE TO DO WELL ON THE
STATES BUBBLE TESTS.
>> IT'S TOUGH TO PLAY BOTH
GAMES.
IT TAKES A LOT OF TIME FOR KIDS
TO DISCOVER SOMETHING.
IT'S VERY QUICK FOR ME TO SAY,
"THIS IS WHAT IT IS.
GIVE IT BACK TO ME TOMORROW."
AND SO RIGHT NOW THE TESTS ARE
BUILT ON A BREADTH OF, YOU KNOW,
A WIDE SCOPE OF CURRICULUM.
IF YOU'RE GOING THROUGH THAT
DISCOVERY METHOD WHERE THE KIDS
ARE DISCOVERING IT THEMSELVES,
IT'S GONNA TAKE MORE TIME.
AND SO YOU MIGHT NOT BE ABLE TO
GET THROUGH AS MUCH, BUT YOU CAN
GET THROUGH IT IN MORE DETAIL.
>> Reporter: THE STATE TESTS
BREADTH, BUT DANVILLE WANTS
DEPTH.
WOULD YOU JUST AS SOON GET RID
OF THOSE STATE TESTS?
>> YEAH, I REALLY WOULD.
>> Reporter: THE DISTRICT WOULD
RATHER BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE BY
ITS SCORES ON THE A.C.T., A
NATIONAL TEST SIMILAR TO THE
S.A.T., THAT'S RECOGNIZED AS A
GOOD MEASURE OF COLLEGE
READINESS.
>> SO YOU'RE REALLY ASKING FOR
YOUR OWN SET OF RULES.
>> WE ARE.
WE ARE ASKING FOR OUR OWN SET OF
RULES.
>> Reporter: THAT COULD HAPPEN.
IN THE NEXT FEW WEEKS, KENTUCKY
MAY DESIGNATE DANVILLE A
DISTRICT OF INNOVATION, WHICH
COULD GIVE IT MORE SAY OVER HOW
ITS STUDENTS ARE EVALUATED.
>> Woodruff: A DEADLY FIRE AT AN
HISTORIC HOTEL, A GUILTY VERDICT
FOR A TEENAGER, AND NOW-- MORE
THAN 40 YEARS LATER-- FREEDOM
FOR THE MAN CONVICTED OF MURDER.
>> THIS IS A TALE OF TWO
TRAGEDIES, MAN.
YOU KNOW, THE 29 POOR SOULS THAT
LOST THEIR LIVES THERE, AND MY
CONVICTION.
>> Woodruff: FOR LOUIS TAYLOR,
TODAY WAS THE FIRST DAY IN MORE
THAN FOUR DECADES THAT BEGAN
OUTSIDE A PRISON CELL.
TAYLOR HAD BEEN BEHIND BARS
SINCE HE WAS A TEENAGER,
CONVICTED OF STARTING A FIRE IN
1970 AT TUCSON'S PIONEER HOTEL,
THAT LEFT 29 PEOPLE DEAD.
NOW 58, TAYLOR WAS RELEASED
YESTERDAY AS PART OF A PLEA DEAL
WITH PROSECUTORS, AFTER NEW
EVIDENCE SURFACED QUESTIONING
HIS GUILT.
>> HOW DO YOU PLEAD: GUILTY, NOT
GUILTY OR NO CONTEST?
>> NO CONTEST.
>> Woodruff: TAYLOR MAINTAINED
HIS INNOCENCE TODAY.
BY ENTERING A NO CONTEST PLEA HE
GAINED HIS IMMEDIATE RELEASE,
BUT HE ALSO GAVE UP THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SEEK COMPENSATION
FROM THE STATE.
>> I WASN'T GOING TO GIVE THEM
ANOTHER MINUTE, ANOTHER HOUR,
ANOTHER DECADE.
YOU KNOW, I WANTED OUT.
THE WHOLE WORLD KNOWS I'M
INNOCENT.
>> Woodruff: PROSECUTORS SAID
YESTERDAY THEY STILL BELIEVE
TAYLOR IS GUILTY, BUT CITED
FACTORS THAT WOULD MAKE A NEW
TRIAL DIFFICULT.
>> BOTH THE ARSON REVIEW
COMMITTEE AND THE TUCSON FIRE
DEPARTMENT INVESTIGATORS
CONCLUDED THAT BECAUSE OF THE
LAPSE OF TIME, THE EVIDENCE NO
LONGER BEING AVAILABLE, THE FACT
THAT SOME OF IT WAS DEGRADED,
SOME OF IT WAS MISSING, SOME OF
IT HAD BEEN DESTROYED, THAT THE
CAUSE OF THE FIRE COULD NOT BE
DETERMINED AT THIS TIME.
IN OTHER WORDS, THEY WERE UNABLE
>> Woodruff: TAYLOR'S RELEASE
CAME JUST DAYS AFTER A FOLLOW UP
TO A 2002 "60 MINUTES" REPORT
CASDOUT BTS AS TO WHETHER THE
FIRE WAS, IN FACT, ARSON.
TAYLOR'S LAWYERS ALLEGED
PROSECUTORS COMMITTED MISCONDUCT
IN THE ORIGINAL TRIAL BY
NEGLECTING TO INFORM THE DEFENSE
TEAM THAT NO ACCELERANTS WERE
FOUND AT THE HOTEL.
FOR MORE ON THIS STORY, WE ARE
JOINED BY RICHARD RUELAS.
HE IS A REPORTER WITH THE
ARIZONA REPUBLIC AND WAS IN THE
COURTROOM YESTERDAY.
WELCOME TO THE PROGRAM.
REMIND US, WHY WAS MR. TAYLOR,
LOUIS TAYLOR, CONVICTED IN THE
FIRST PLACE?
>> HE WAS THERE AT THE FIRE THAT
NIGHT.
GOOD EVENING.
HE WAS THERE AT THE FIRE THAT
NIGHT, DECEMBER, 1970.
HE TOLD US TODAY HE WAS GOING
THERE TO ATTEND SOME PARTIES,
MAYBE GET SOME FREE FOOD AND
DRINKS.
HE WAS KIND OF A JUVENILE
DELINQUENT IN THE AREA AND KNOWN
TO POLICE.
THE FIRE STARTS AND HE ENDS UP
HELPING PEOPLE OUT OF THE HOTEL
BUT AS POLICE ARE LOOKING FOR
SUSPECTS HE MADE SOME ODD
STATEMENTS, HE COULDN'T QUITE
EXPLAIN WHAT HE WAS DOING AT THE
HOTEL, THEY FOUND MATCHES ON HIM
AND POLICE TOOK HIM IN FOR
SEVERAL HOURS OF QUESTIONING AND
ARRESTED HIM.
>> Woodruff: AND WHAT WAS THE
NEW EVIDENCE THAT ULTIMATELY
CAUSED THE LAW ENFORCEMENT
SYSTEM TO GIVE HIM THIS CHANCE
TO GET OUT?
>> IT'S NOT SO MUCH NEWLY
DISCOVERED EVIDENCE BUT A NEW
WAY OF LOOKING AT THE EVIDENCE.
THE SCIENCE OF FIRE HAS CHANGED
SO MUCH SINCE 1970.
ONE FIRE EXPERT TOLD ME THIS
WEEK THAT THE OLD WAY OF
DETERMINING ARSON WAS PRETTY
MUCH GUESS WORK BUT SCIENCE HAD
DETERMINED WAYS OF FINDING OUT
WHEN THERE'S A FLASHOVER FIRE
AND THINGS THAT MIGHT HAVE
LOOKED LIKE ARSON BEFORE NOW
MIGHT HAVE BEEN CAUSED BY AN
ACCIDENT OR SOMETHING ELSE LIKE
THAT.
SO EXPERTS NOW LOOKING AT THE
EVIDENCE, HIS DEFENSE ATTORNEYS
SAY WOULD HAVE NOT BEEN ABLE TO
SAY IT WAS ARSON AND MIGHT HAVE
DETERMINED IT BEING AN
ACCIDENTAL FIRE.
>> Brown: AS WE JUST HEARD,
RICHARD RUELAS, PROSECUTORS SAY
THEY BELIEVE HE'S STILL GUILTY.
HE SAYS HE'S INNOCENT.
DOES A CLOUD HANG OVER THIS FROM
NOW ON?
>> THERE'S A GAP BETWEEN BEING
ABLE TO TAKE A CASE TO COURT AND
PROVE IT BEYOND A REASONABLE
DOUBT AND BEING ABLE TO ACTUALLY
EXONERATE SOMEBODY.
LEGALLY, HE IS A CONVICTED FELON
AND HE HAS THE LEGAL
RESPONSIBILITY FOR WHAT
HAPPENED.
HIS "NO CONTEST" PLEA ALLOWS HIM
TO MAINTAIN HIS INNOCENCE BUT IT
HAS THE LEGAL WEIGHT OF A
CONVICTION.
HE SAYS THAT HE DIDN'T DO IT AND
THAT HE WAS WRONGLY CONVICTED
AND THERE'S A LOT OF EVIDENCE
AROUND THE TRIAL, WITHHOLDING OF
THE LACK OF ACCELERANT BEING
FOUND.
PROSECUTORS DIDN'T TELL THAT TO
THE DEFENSE.
THEY MIGHT HAVE JUMPED TO A
CONCLUSION THAT IT WAS LOUIS
TAYLOR BASED ON HIS RACE WAS ONE
ALLEGATION.
AND THE FAULTY SCIENCE ABOUT
THEARSON.
THEN AGAIN, THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO
WILL SAY LOUIS TAYLOR MADE A LOT
OF INCONSISTENT STATEMENTS TO
POLICE AND THERE WERE THOSE
BOOKS OF MATCHES HE HAD ON HIS
PERSON THAT ARE KIND OF
UNEXPLAINED.
>> Woodruff: TELL US WHA WHAT IT
WAS LIKE IN THE COURTROOM
YESTERDAY.
>> IT REALLY SEEMED TO OPEN UP
SOME WOUNDS FOR THE RELATIVES OF
VICTIMS WHO WERE IN THE FRONT
ROW OF THE GALLERY OF THE
COURTHOUSE, THE COURTROOM.
ONE OF THEM CHOSE TO MAKE A
STATEMENT ON BEHALF OF ALL 29
VICTIMS.
HE SAID HE DIDN'T WANT THEM TO
JUST BE A LIST OF NAMES.
HE WAS FOUR YEARS OLD WHEN HIS
FATHER DIED IN THE FIRE AND HE
LET LOUIS TAYLOR KNOW HE BORE NO
ILL WILL AGAINST HIM AND HE
HOPED HE DIDN'T WASTE HIS NEW
BEGINNING.
TAYLOR TOLD US TODAY THAT DURING
THE HEARING HE WANTED TO HUG
THAT MAN BUT HIS LAWYERS TOLD
HIM HE NEEDED TO MAINTAIN AND HE
SAID HE WANTED THE HEARING TO BE
OVER WITH AS SOON AS POSSIBLE
BECAUSE AS YOU HEARD HIM SAY ON
THE CLIP HE DIDN'T WANT TO GIVE
THE STATE OF ARIZONA ONE MORE
MINUTE, ONE MORE HOUR OF HIS
TIME.
>> Woodruff: OTHER THAN THE
HERE IS DRAMA OF THIS CASE, WHAT
IS THE IMPORTANCE OF IT.
>> WELL, IF CONVICTION WAS
OVERTURNED BASED ON FAULTY
SCIENCE FROM THE '70s AND --
FROM THE '70s, THERE'S OTHER
ARSON CASES FROM THE '70s AND
'80s THAT MIGHT BE REEXAMINED
UNDER THE NEW WAYS OF LOOKING AT
FIRE SCIENCE.
SO THERE MIGHT BE MORE OF THESE
CASES COMING DOWN THE PIKE.
>> Brown: WHAT HAPPENS TO
LOUIS TAYLOR.
HE'S BEEN IN PRISON FOR 42
YEARS.
I READ THAT HE HAD VERY FEW
FAMILY MEMBERS, I GUESS JUST A
NIECE WAS IN COURT YESTERDAY.
WHAT HAPPENS TO HIM?
IS THERE A SYSTEM TO HELP HIM
ACCLIMATE BACK TO THE REST OF
THE WORLD?
>> THERE IS NO FORMAL SYSTEM
BECAUSE, YOU KNOW, THE
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS, IF
THEY KNOW YOU'RE GOING TO BE
RELEASED, MIGHT HELP YOU
REACCLIMATE.
BUT THE ATTORNEYS WHO WORKED ON
HIS BEHALF TO GET HIM OUT HAVE
TURNED INTO AD HOC SOCIAL
WORKERS, TRYING TO SET HIM UP
WITH A PLACE TO LIVE IN PHOENIX
AND HELP HIM REACCLIMATE
HIMSELF.
THIS IS A MAN WHO WAS A GRADE
SCHOOL DROPOUT, HE SPENT A LOT
OF YEARS IN JUVENILE DETENTION
AND REFORM SCHOOLS.
HE WAS CALLED INCORRIGIBLE.
AND HE SPENT HIS ADULT YEARS
BEHIND BARS AND HE SAID HE
PICKED UP A LOT OF BAD HABITS
DOING SO.
AND THIS WAS A MAN WHO DIDN'T
EVER THINK HE WOULD REALLY FACE
THE POSSIBILITY OF RELEASE.
SO HE LEARNED SOME SKILLS BEHIND
BARS.
HE LEARNED HOW TO BE A BARBER.
HE WAS A SEEM STRESS FOR A
WHILE.
AND HE LEARNED HOW TO BE A
MEDICAL TECHNICIAN AND HE'S
GOING TO HAVE TO HOPE THAT
EMPLOYERS LOOK BEYOND WHAT IS A
FELONY CONVICTION AND MAYBE GIVE
HIM A CHANCE AT GETTING A JOB.
>> Brown: REMARKABLE STORY.
RICHARD RUELAS, THANK YOU VERYG.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT, TO
THE LATEST IN OUR SERIES ON HIGH
SCHOOL DROPOUTS, THIS TIME
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.
NEARLY HALF OF ALL STUDENTS
EXPERIENCE SOME SORT OF
BULLYING, A UNIVERSITY OF
VIRGINIA STUDY LAST YEAR SHOWED
THE MORE BULLYING IN A SCHOOL,
THE LOWER ITS GRADUATION RATES.
IN COLORADO, ACTORS AND
EDUCATORS ARE TEAMING UP WITH AN
UNUSUAL SOLUTION.
JEFF IS BACK WITH THE STORY,
PART OF OUR AMERICAN GRADUATE
PROJECT.
>> PROSPERO HAD BEEN WRONGED.
HE SEETHED.
HE BURNED.
HE WANTED REVENGE.
>> Reporter: SHAKESPEARE'S
PROSPERO, ONE OF THE GREAT
CHARACTERS IN WORLD LITERATURE,
IS A MAN WITH GOOD REASON TO
SEEK RETRIBUTION.
AND AS "THE TEMPEST" BEGINS,
HE'S CONJURED UP A STORM TO
SHIPWRECK HIS BROTHER AND THE
KING OF MILAN, AFTER THEY HAD
WRONGED HIM.
IN ONE READING OF THE 400-YEAR-
OLD TALE, IT DEPICTS A CLASSIC
CYCLE OF VIOLENCE, WHERE THE
VICTIM BECOMES THE PERPETRATOR
OF EVIL DEEDS.
THAT IS, UNTIL THIS MOMENT IN
THE PLAY WHEN PROSPERO REALIZES
THERE IS ANOTHER CHOICE.
>> THE RARER ACTION IS IN
VIRTUE, NOT VENGEANCE.
>> Reporter: THIS WAS THE
COLORADO SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL ON
A RECENT VISIT TO THORNTON HIGH
SCHOOL JUST NORTH OF DENVER,
PRESENTING AN ADAPTATION OF THE
PLAY WITH A VERY SPECIFIC GOAL:
AS PART OF AN ANTI-BULLYING
PROGRAM AIMED AT REDUCING TEEN
AND PRE-TEEN VIOLENCE.
DIRECTOR TIM ORR SAYS USING
SHAKESPEARE IS A NATURAL CHOICE.
>> SHAKESPEARE IS AN EXPERT IN
VIOLENCE.
THERE IS SO MUCH VIOLENCE AND
INTIMIDATION.
AND HE EXPLORES EVERY POSSIBLE
WAY: FAMILY VIOLENCE, NATION
VIOLENCE, KINGS AND QUEENS,
HUSBANDS AND WIVES, CHILDREN AND
PARENTS.
ROMEO AND JULIET STARTS OUT WITH
THE THING THAT SHAKESPEARE DOES
SO WELL, HE ALWAYS SHOWS THE
MOMENT OF CHOICE THAT THESE
CHARACTERS HAD.
THEY COULD HAVE GONE THAT WAY OR
THEY COULD HAVE GONE THIS WAY.
AND IF YOU KEEP GOING THIS WAY,
THIS IS WHAT EVENTUALLY HAPPENS.
>> Reporter: THE IDEA WAS
CONCEIVED TWO YEARS AGO BY THE
THEATER GROUP IN CONJUCTION WITH
THE UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO'S
CENTER FOR THE STUDY AND
PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE.
BY THE END OF THIS SCHOOL YEAR,
NEARLY 150 SCHOOLS WILL HAVE
PARTICIPATED, INVOLVING 30,000
STUDENTS FROM ALL GRADE LEVELS.
BEVERLY KINGSTON, WHO HEADS THE
CENTER, SAYS THE IDEA IS TO GET
STUDENTS THINKING AND TALKING
ABOUT THE VARIOUS ROLES PEOPLE
PLAY IN BULLYING SITUATIONS.
>> IT'S  AMASOZING THAT
SHAKESPEARE WROTE THIS SO LONG
AGO BUT THERE REALLY IS A PLACE
IN IT FOR EVERYONE.
THERE'S CHARACTERS WHO ARE MORE
THE BULLYING TYPE.
THERE'S SOME THAT ARE THE
VICTIMS, SOME THAT ARE THE
BYSTANDERS.
AND SO IT LENDS ITSELF TO A
CONVERSATION ABOUT ALL THOSE
ROLES.
AND HOW CHANGING ALL THOSE ROLES
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, THE
PROGRAM FEATURED "TWELFTH NIGHT"
WITH THE TORMENTED CHARACTER OF
MALVOLIO, SERVANT TO A RICH
COUNTESS.
CRYSTAL EISELE IS ONE OF THE
ACTORS.
>> POOR MALVOLIO GETS BULLIED
BEYOND BELIEF.
HE'S ASKED TO WEAR CRAZY THINGS.
HE'S GIVEN A NOTE FROM PEOPLE
WHO SAY IT'S FROM SOMEBODY ELSE
AND THAT SO AND SO LIKES YOU.
THIS HAPPENS ALL THE TIME IN
SCHOOLS.
>> Reporter: THESE DAYS, OF
COURSE, IT HAPPENS IN FORMS NOT
KNOWN TO SHAKESPEARE, INCLUDING
CYBER-BULLYING.
AND IN THIS VERSION OF "TWELFTH
NIGHT", THAT HARRASSING NOTE
ARRIVES ON MALVOLIO'S CELLPHONE.
>> OH, IT IS MY LADY'S TWEET.
>> Reporter: AFTER THE HOUR-
LONG, ABRIDGED PERFORMANCES,
THE ACTORS LEAD SMALL-GROUP
WORKSHOPS TO GET STUDENTS TO
ROLE PLAY MODERN DAY SCENARIOS.
>> I'LL KILL YOU, YOU ALMOST GOT
ME CAUGHT!
I'M GOING TO GET IN TROUBLE!
YOU KNOW WHAT MY DAD'S GOING TO
DO TO ME?
>> WITHIN THE WORKSHOP WE FOCUS
ON WHAT IS IN YOUR WORLD?
WHAT DO YOU SEE THAT YOU ARE
DEALING WITH, WHERE THE CYCLE OF
VIOLENCE IS CONTINUING?
AND WE ASK THEM FIRST, WHAT DO
YOU KNOW WORKS?
>> THESE ARE BASIC, BASIC ACTING
EXERCISES THAT WE HAVE TAKEN TO
THE CLASSROOM AND APPLIED TO
THIS SITUATION.
THAT'S ALL ACTI IS:NG TAKING
SITUATIONAL MATERIAL, CHANGING
THE OUTCOME, MAKING THE CHOICES.
>> Reporter: NINTH GRADERS
STEPHEN BANKS AND JADE TRUJILLO
SAY THEY COULD VERY MUCH RELATE
TO THE CHARACTERS IN "THE
TEMPEST."
>> BUT IF EVERYONE CHOOSES
VIRTUE, IT WOULD BE WAY BETTER
BECAUSE IT'S THE BETTER WAY TO
GO.
IF YOU GET REVENGE ON SOMEONE,
IT'S NOT GOING TO FIX ANYTHING,
IT'S GOING TO MAKE YOU FEEL BAD
AND ESCALATE INTO SOMETHING
WORSE.
>> LIKE ARIEL TOLD PROSPERO THAT
HE SHOULD FORGIVE THEM-- HIS
BROTHER AND THE KING.
IT'S ONE OF THOSE THINGS, IF YOU
SEE SOMETHING HAPPENING TO
SOMEBODY ELSE, YOU SHOULD STAND
UP AND TELL THEM TO LEAVE THEM
ALONE.
>> Rte
ARTS TEACHER CHERYL NEWEY SAYS
SHE'S UNDER NO ILLUSIONS THAT A
TWO HOUR SHAKESPEARE SESSION
WILL CHANGE A SCHOOL CLIMATE
OVERNIGHT.
BUT SHE THINKS IT'S A USEFUL
TOOL TO ENCOURAGE STUDENTS TO
SPEAK UP.
>> IRONICALLY, THE KIDS WHO
SPOKE OUT IN THE WORKSHOP
SESSION ARE KIDS WHO I WOULD SAY
ARE KIND OF ON THE FRINGE.
AND I THOUGHT IT WAS INTEREG
THAT THEY FELT COMFORTABLE
RAISING THEIR HANDS AND ASKING
JAMES MANY QUESTIONS.
WHEREAS MANY OF THE KIDS WHO
WERE MORE POPULAR, THEY WERE
MORE QUIET.
>> Reporter: CRYSTAL EISELE SAYS
SHE IS OFTEN APPROACHED BY
STUDENTS WHO SAY THE WORKSHOP
HAS HELPED THEM REALIZE THEY
HAVE OTHER CHOICES THAN
VIOLENCE.
SHE DESCRIBED AN ENCOUNTER WITH
ONE YOUNG MAN EARLIER THIS YEAR.
>> HE SAID, "I SAW MYSELF IN
THAT ARIEL CHARACTER IN 'THE
TEMPEST', THAT IS TRYING TO MAKE
EVERYTHING BETTER BUT AT THE
SAME TIME IS ENSLAVED."
AND HE GAVE ME SOME SPECIFICS
ABOUT HIS WORLD AND WHAT WAS
GOING ON AND WHAT HE WAS DOING
TO SOLVE THE SITUATION.
>> Reporter: IT'S CERTAINLY NOT
THE FIRST TIME SHAKESPEARE HAS
BEEN ADAPTED TO SPEAK TO
CONTEMPORARY ISSUES AND THE
PROGRAM'S CREATORS SAY THEY'RE
HOPEFUL THEATER COMPANIES IN
OTHER CITIES WILL ADOPT SIMILAR
PROGRAMS.
>> Ifill: AMERICAN GRADUATE IS
FUNDED BY THE CORPORATION FOR
PUBLIC BROADCASTING.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
THE PENTAGON ANNOUNCED PLANS TO
DEPLOY A MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEM
TO GUAM, IN THE FACE OF
ESCALATING NUCLEAR THREATS FROM
NORTH KOREA.
NINE SUICIDE BOMBERS DRESSED AS
AND PRESIDENT OBAMA PRESSED
CONGRESS TO ADOPT NEW GUN LAWS
THAT INCLUDE BACKGROUND CHECKS.
>> Ifill: ONLINE, TEACHING A
AND THAT'S THE "NEWSHOUR" FOR
TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE TALK WITH FORMER
JUSTICE SANDRA DAY O'CONNOR
ABOUT PIVOTAL MOMENTS IN THE
HISTORY OF THE SUPREME COURT.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.